+++
draft = false
date = "2017-04-07T00:00:00-03:00"
title = "Why I learned Python"
tags = ["Python"]
slug = "learning-python"
+++

About eleven years ago, after finishing my first semester in University I
decided to learn how to program in Python. In this post I will talk about why I
found Python interesting at the time as well as how it felt to me as someone
with little programming knowledge.

<!--more-->

## Why Python

My first programming language was Java. I could not really compare it with
anything else, as it was the only programming language I had worked with, but I
was happy with it as the code I wrote felt clear and there were IDEs such as
Eclipse that really aided my learning process. At the time I had also done the
switch to Linux and saw that a great deal of programs and tools I was using
were written in Python. This caught my attention as it seemed that this
language hitherto unknown to me was rather popular and from what some people
said at the time pretty powerful and easy to learn.

It wasn't until I saw a post on [Planet Ubuntu](http://planet.ubuntu.com/) that
showed a very simple Python script that I decided to learn Python. This script
would, given a directory, go through all MP3 files (including those in
subdirectories), open them and read the ID3 data. While this program was not
particularly useful for me, what really caught my attention was how short and
clear it was. I had never seen Python code before, but I could pretty much
understand everything that was happening.

That's when I decided that Python would be the next programming language I
would learn.

## Learning Python

I decided I was going to start by reading a book about Python. I settled for
[Dive into Python](http://www.diveintopython.net/) as it was (and still is)
free. I really liked the book, it was clear and went straight to the point so I
was doing small Python scripts in no time. Another book generally considered to
be excellent is
[Learn Python The Hard Way](https://learnpythonthehardway.org/).
[The Hitchhikerâ€™s Guide to Python](http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/) is
also an amazing resource that covers a lot of common topics, not just for
beginners but also for people that already know the language.

## What I did not like about Python

Coming from a statically typed language like Java, what was hardest for me was
not having static type checking. It was tough at first and I kept getting
errors left and right probably due to the fact that I was so used to having an
IDE check everything for me automatically. I also fell victim to a few of the
common Python pitfalls new programmers come across, such as mixing spaces with
tabs or forgetting to use `global` when changing a module level variable form
within a function.
These are all things you get quickly used to, and a lot can be avoided by using
something like [PyChecker](http://pychecker.sourceforge.net/) or
[Pyflakes](https://launchpad.net/pyflakes).

## What I loved about Python

The nice things Python provides far outweighed any issues I may have had.
Again, coming from Java, list comprehensions and the way iterables worked with
`for` loops was mind blowing to me as so much boilerplate code could be
avoided. I was also blown away by how easily generic code could be written by
using `*args` and `**kwargs`. Python's power also comes from it's comprehensive
standard library as well as the vast amount of third party libraries available,
if you can think of anything it's probably already available for you. Finally,
I found Python to be an incredibly fast language to prototype or program quick
proofs of concept in.

For almost five years now I have been programming in Python full time at work
and I couldn't be happier with it, so I think deciding to learn Python all
those years ago really payed off. If somebody asked me whether Python was a
good language to learn, the answer would be a definite yes.
